My name is Dewey Dunnington, I'm a software engineer at Evoltron Data, and I'm a developer
on the Apache Arrow project, where I get to work on cool things like geospatial data and
R. One of the things that came out of that is the GRO package, which takes my favorite
things about Arrow, and my favorite things about R, which is rspatial, and puts them
together.
My first favorite thing about the Arrow package are parquet files.
So parquet files are a little bit like CSVs in that you can read and write tables, but
they're binary, so they're smaller, and they're faster to read and write, and they remember
your data type.
So if you write a date to a parquet file, you get a date back.
If you write a number to a parquet file, you get a number back.
With GeoArrow, if you write an sf object to a parquet file, you get an sf object back,
which is really useful, and it turns out that it's also really fast.
So if you find yourself waiting for your files to load, try parquet.
If you find yourself waiting for your geospatial files to load, try GeoArrow read-view-parquet.
My second favorite thing about the Arrow package are datasets.
Datasets let you take a whole lot of files that you create, and you can split them up
however you want, and you can query them like they're a database.
In this example, I have a whole bunch of parking interactions from the city of Philadelphia,
and I have them hosted on an S3 bucket.
They could be on my computer, too.
Here, using the Arrow package, I can open them as a dataset, and I can query them using
DeepLyer, and when I hit collect, Arrow takes care of the details.
And there's a lot of details to take care of.
Arrow pulls the data from a remote data source or from your computer, and Arrow runs your
query in parallel using all the cores on your computer, and it splits up the data into manageable
chunks just in case the dataset is bigger than your memory.
A lot of geospatial data is really big, and a lot of it is bigger than memory, so this
lets you use that workflow with geospatial data, and it just works.
The final thing is something that a lot of users don't think about, but it's something
that I'm really passionate about as an rspatial package maintainer, which is simplifying possibly
how to maintain all of the components that make up the rspatial ecosystem and how they
fit together.
There's a lot of components, and they all come together, hopefully silently, to make
your experience as an rspatial user awesome.
But there's a lot of interactions, and there's a lot of people that spend a lot of time managing
all of those interactions and maintaining them.
GeoArrow uses a data structure that we can pass between all of those, which means that
we can define an interaction for every single component rather than every single pair of
components, which is a lot less maintenance work, and it means that rspatial developers
like me can spend more time adding features, which is fun, and less time fixing bugs, which
is less fun.
And finally, because that thing that we're passing around is an Arrow array, we get all
of the Arrow ecosystem at our disposal, which includes the Arrow package, Parquet files
and datasets, but also the wider Arrow ecosystem, which includes bindings for Python and Rust
and Julia and a lot of other languages and a lot of other frameworks that have adopted
Arrow.
The GeoArrow package is still under development, as well as the Apache Arrow integration that
enables this, but if you want to follow along, you can follow me on Twitter or follow me
on GitHub, or visit my website where I blog about all sorts of incredibly nerdy things
involving geospatial, R, and Arrow.